---
title: Essay 2
layout: about
permalink: /essay-02.html
---

{% include feature/image.html filename="sotu-word-cloud.png" alt="word cloud generated from state of the union addresses." %}    

# Muckrakers & the Expose

## The Original Investigative Journalists
Although the phrase “muckraker” was meant to be an insult, the men and women who often risked their lives to expose business and government corruption in the Progressive Era were less concerned with the labels society thrust upon them. Originally coined by Theodore Roosevelt in a speech in 1906, muckrakers were narrow-minded people that stood in the way of progress, according to him. But the reality was muckrakers were anything but narrow-minded. They worked tirelessly, often going undercover, to shine a light on the human ramifications of greed and corruption. They forced elite society to acknowledge parts of their great cities they would have preferred to ignore. In this way, muckrakers were the original investigative journalists, and ended up paving the way for future investigative reporters who appeared later on in the twentieth century.

The Gilded Age in America resulted in vast amounts of wealth among a select few, and business was taking on new forms in the shape of corporations. The rapid rise of industrialization fueled this great wealth, but it also formed a huge divide in the American population - the haves and have nots. The business world was akin to the wild west with few regulations and shady deals and liaisons between government and rich industrial titans. There was little concern for the working conditions of factory workers who toiled six days a week in unsafe conditions. Business became a religion, and if you weren’t heeding it, then you were just in the way. Either that, or you weren’t fit to run your own life, as was expressed clearly in Andrew Carnegie’s Gospel of Wealth. 

It’s not very surprising, then, to know that the Progressive Era brought about a massive shift in public perception of the economic inequalities they saw around them. The Panic of 1893 was another example to many ordinary citizens of what happens when too much power is held in the hands of a few. The laissez-faire attitude that had ruled the American economy for so long was slowly starting to crack. And it was the muckrakers who were ready with their pen and paper to document it. 

The mediums of documentation used by the muckrakers was not just limited to newspapers – they also used cartoons, poetry, and books, both fiction and non-fiction, to hold a mirror up to society. The Jungle by Upton Sinclair, for example, is a fiction novel about the dark side of Chicago’s meatpacking industry.[^1] Sinclair is considered one of the most famous muckrakers for his stark portrayal of the harsh life of working immigrants in an unforgiving city. Published in 1906, it shook readers to their very core with its revolting descriptions of rotting meat and filthy factories. Sinclair, who wrote for newspapers before The Jungle, treated preparation for the book much like a journalist might. Although he was writing fiction, he spent hours interviewing meatpacking workers in Chicago’s stockyards. For over a month, he lurked and observed the life of slaughterhouse workers until he had a razor-sharp comprehension of what he wanted to say. 

Other muckrakers like Ida Tarbell were more traditional in their approach. Tarbell is now famous for her expose´ article series on Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company that was published in a magazine in 1902. She spent years in deep research on Standard Oil’s shady and questionable business practices. The series became so popular that it eventually turned into a book, The History of the Standard Oil Company. Tarbell had a personal motivation for targeting Rockefeller; growing up in the Pennsylvania oil fields, she witnessed the poverty and economic disaster that came from oil tycoons having too much control. The South Improvement Company in Pennsylvania had been Rockefeller’s early attempt at oil monopolization, and Tarbell remembered it well. Her work on Standard Oil eventually resulted in a 1911 Supreme Court ruling that Rockefeller’s company violated the Sherman Antitrust Act. 

In true undercover reporting fashion, muckrakers like Nellie Bly got herself committed to a mental asylum to get a firsthand experience of the terrible conditions there. She also worked in factories to report on the terrible condition workers suffered. Other notable muckrakers such as Lincoln Steffens traveled around, reporting on what they witnessed. Like Ida Tarbell, Steffens wrote for McClure’s Magazine, which was a popular publication at the time that focused on exposing “America’s ills.” Steffens reporting on city life eventually turned into a book called The Shame of the Cities. Through their writing and art, these men and women were indeed raking muck that was practically invisible to America’s wealthy upper classes. That “muck” included the desperation of poverty that feels inescapable no matter how hard you work. It also included the frivolous lives and spending habits of the super-rich and their willingness to turn a blind eye to those less fortunate. 

## Notes
[^1]: Gilmore & Sugrue, *These United States* (New York: W.W. Norton, 2015), 66.
